
## 12.6.2 Supervised Microcluster Approach

The supervised microcluster is essentially an instance-based classification approach. In this model, it is assumed that a training and a test stream are simultaneously received over time. Because of concept drift, it is important to adjust the model dynamically over time.

In the nearest-neighbor classification approach, the dominant class label among the top-$k$ nearest neighbors is reported as the relevant result. In the streaming scenario, it is difficult to efficiently compute the $k$ nearest neighbors for a particular test instance because of the increasing size of the stream. However, fine-grained microclustering can be used to create a fixed-size summary of the data stream that does not increase with stream progression. A supervised variant of microclustering is used in which data points of different classes are not allowed to mix within clusters. It is relatively easy to maintain such microclusters with minor changes to the CluStream algorithm. The main difference is that data points are assigned to microclusters belonging to the same class during the cluster update process. Thus, labels are associated with microclusters rather than individual data points. The dominant label of the top-$k$ nearest microclusters is reported as the relevant label.

This does not, however, account for the changes that need to be made to the algorithm as a result of concept drift. Because of concept drift, the trends in the stream will change. Therefore, it is more relevant to use microclusters from specific time horizons to increase accuracy. While the most recent horizon may often be relevant, this may sometimes not be the case when the trends in the stream revert back suddenly to older trends. Therefore, a part of the training stream is separated out as the validation stream. Recent parts of the validation stream are utilized as test cases to evaluate the accuracy over different time horizons. The optimal horizon is selected. The $k$-nearest neighbor approach is applied to test instances over this optimally selected horizon.

## 12.6.3 Ensemble Method

A robust ensemble method was also proposed for the classification of data streams. The method is also designed to handle concept drift because it can effectively account for evolution in the underlying data. The data stream is partitioned into chunks, and multiple classifiers are trained on each of these chunks. The final classification score is computed as a function of the score on each of these chunks. In particular, ensembles of classification models are scored, such as C4.5, RIPPER, naive Bayesian, from sequential chunks of the data stream. The classifiers in the ensemble are weighted based on their expected classification accuracy under the time-evolving environment. This ensures that the approach is able to achieve a higher degree of accuracy because the classifiers are dynamically tuned to optimize the accuracy for that part of the data stream. It was shown that an ensemble classifier produces a smaller error than a single classifier if the weights of all classifiers are assigned based on their expected classification accuracy.
