
## 12.6.4 Massive-Domain Streaming Classification

Many streaming applications contain multidimensional discrete attributes with very high cardinality. In such cases, it becomes difficult to use conventional classifiers because of memory limitations. The count-min sketch can be used to address these challenges. Each class is associated with a sketch that is used to track frequent $r$-combinations of items in the training data, where $r$ is bounded above by a small number $k$. For each incoming training data point, all possible $r$-combinations (for $r \leq k$) are treated as pseudo-items that are added to the sketch of the relevant class. Different classes will have different relevant pseudo-items that will show up in the varying frequencies of the cells belonging to sketches of different classes. These differences can be used to determine the most discriminative cells in the different sketches. The frequent discriminative pseudo-items are determined to create implicit rules relating the pseudo-items to the different classes. These rules are implicit because they are not actually materialized, but implicitly stored in the sketches. They are retrieved only at the time of the classification of a test instance. For a given test instance, it is determined, which pseudo-items correspond to the combination of items inside them. The discriminative ones among them are determined by retrieving their statistics from the class-specific sketches. These are then used to perform the classification of the test instance, using the same general approach as a rule-based classifier. The bibliographic notes contain pointers to details of the massive-domain classification work.

## 12.7 Summary

In this chapter, algorithms for stream mining were presented. Streams present several challenges related to high volume, concept drift, the massive-domain nature of data items, and resource constraints. In this context, synopsis construction is one of the most fundamental problems in the streaming scenario. As long as a high-quality stream synopsis can be constructed, it can be leveraged for stream mining algorithms. The major issue with the use of synopsis methods is that different synopsis structures are suited to different applications. The most common synopsis structures used with data streams are reservoir samples and sketches. Reservoir samples provide the greatest flexibility and should be used where possible.

The core problems of frequent pattern mining, clustering, outlier detection, and classification have also been addressed in the streaming scenario. Most of these problems can be addressed with reservoir sampling effectively, where approximate solutions are desired. In the particular case of outlier detection, numerous variations of the problem definition are possible in the streaming scenario.

## 12.8 Bibliographic Notes

A detailed discussion of streaming algorithms may be found in [40]. The reservoir-sampling method was originally proposed in [498]. The biased reservoir sampling approach with decay was proposed in [35]. The count-min sketch was described in [165]. Numerous other applications of the count-min sketch are discussed in the same work. The AMS sketch was proposed in [72]. The Flajolet–Martin data structure for distinct element counting was proposed in [208]. A survey of synopsis construction algorithms in data streams is provided in [40]. A detailed discussion of the capabilities of some of these data structures may also be found in the same work.
