
## 12.4.3 Massive-Domain Stream Clustering

As discussed earlier, the massive-domain scenario is ubiquitous in the stream context. In many cases, one may need to work with a multidimensional data stream, in which the individual attributes are drawn on a massive domain of possible values. In such cases, stream analysis becomes much more difficult because “concise” summaries of the clusters become much more space-intensive. This is also the motivation for many synopsis structures, such as the bloom filter, the count-min sketch, the AMS sketch, and the Flajolet–Martin algorithm.

The data clustering problem also becomes more challenging in the massive-domain scenario, because of the difficulty in maintaining concise statistics of the clusters. A recent method CSketch has been designed for clustering massive-domain data streams. The idea in this method is to use a count-min sketch to store the frequencies of attribute–value combinations in each cluster. Thus, the number of count-min sketches used is equal to the number of clusters. An online $k$-means style clustering is applied, in which the sketch is used as the representative for the (discrete) attributes in the cluster. For any incoming data point, a dot product is computed with respect to each cluster.

The computation is performed as follows. For each attribute–value combination in the $d$-dimensions, the hash function $h_r(\cdot)$ is applied to it for a particular value of $r$. The frequency of the corresponding sketch cell is determined. The frequencies of all the relevant sketch cells for the $d$ different dimensions are added together. This provides an estimate of the dot product. To obtain a tighter estimate, the minimum value over different hash functions (different values of $r$) is used. The dot product is divided by the total frequency of items in the cluster, to avoid bias towards clusters with many data items.

This computation can be performed accurately because the count-min sketch can compute the dot product accurately in a small space. The data point is assigned to the cluster with which it has the largest dot product. The statistics in the sketch representing that particular cluster are then updated. Thus, this approach shares a common characteristic with microclustering in terms of how data points are incrementally assigned to clusters. However, it does not implement the merging and removal steps. Furthermore, the sketch representation is used instead of the microcluster representation for cluster statistics maintenance. Theoretical guarantees can be shown on clustering quality, with respect to a clustering that has infinite space availability. The bibliographic notes contain pointers to these results.

## 12.5 Streaming Outlier Detection

The problem of streaming outlier detection typically arises either in the context of multidimensional data or time-series data streams. Outlier detection in multidimensional data streams is generally quite different from time series outlier detection. In the latter case,
